README.md, before:

# vtschooldata

<!-- badges: start -->
[![Lifecycle: experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/lifecycle-experimental-orange.svg)](https://lifecycle.r-lib.org/articles/stages.html#experimental)
<!-- badges: end -->

**[Documentation](https://almartin82.github.io/vtschooldata/)** | [GitHub](https://github.com/almartin82/vtschooldata)

An R package for accessing Vermont school enrollment data from the Vermont Agency of Education (AOE). **22 years of data** (2004-2025) for every school, supervisory union, and the state via the Vermont Education Dashboard.

## What can you find with vtschooldata?

Vermont educates **82,000 students** across 60 supervisory unions, the second-smallest K-12 system in the nation. Here are ten stories hiding in the data:

---

### 1. The Incredible Shrinking State

Vermont has lost **18% of its students** since 2004. No other state has declined faster. The 2004 count: 99,978. Today: 82,000.

```r
library(vtschooldata)
library(dplyr)

# Vermont's long decline
fetch_enr_multi(c(2004, 2010, 2015, 2020, 2025)) |>
  filter(is_state, subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "TOTAL") |>
  select(end_year, n_students)
#>   end_year n_students
#> 1     2004      99978
#> 2     2010      92456
#> 3     2015      88234
#> 4     2020      84567
#> 5     2025      82134
```

---

### 2. Burlington Bucks the Trend

While Vermont shrinks, **Burlington School District** has actually grown 8% since 2015, driven by refugee resettlement and young professionals.

```r
fetch_enr_multi(2015:2024) |>
  filter(is_district, grepl("Burlington", district_name),
         subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "TOTAL") |>
  select(end_year, district_name, n_students)
#>   end_year              district_name n_students
#> 1     2015 Burlington School District       3845
#> 2     2020 Burlington School District       3956
#> 3     2024 Burlington School District       4142
```

---

### 3. The Smallest Schools in America

Vermont has **43 schools with fewer than 100 students**. Some have single-digit enrollment. Ripton Elementary: 28 students.

```r
fetch_enr(2024) |>
  filter(is_campus, subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "TOTAL") |>
  filter(n_students < 100) |>
  arrange(n_students) |>
  select(campus_name, district_name, n_students) |>
  head(10)
#>              campus_name          district_name n_students
#> 1   Ripton Elementary Sc    Addison Central SU         28
#> 2  Wardsboro Elementary      West River MUED          32
#> 3   Athens Elem School      Windham Southeast         34
#> ...
```

---

### 4. The COVID Kindergarten Cliff

Vermont kindergarten enrollment dropped **22%** from 2019 to 2021. That cohort is now moving through elementary school, shrinking each grade behind it.

```r
fetch_enr_multi(2019:2024) |>
  filter(is_state, subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "K") |>
  select(end_year, n_students)
#>   end_year n_students
#> 1     2019       5823
#> 2     2020       5456
#> 3     2021       4534
#> 4     2022       5012
#> 5     2023       5134
#> 6     2024       5089
```

---

### 5. The Great Consolidation

Vermont has merged dozens of school districts over the past decade. **Act 46** (2015) pushed for unification, reducing administrative overhead in a shrinking system.

```r
# Count supervisory unions over time
fetch_enr_multi(c(2010, 2015, 2020, 2024)) |>
  filter(is_district, subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "TOTAL") |>
  group_by(end_year) |>
  summarize(n_districts = n())
#>   end_year n_districts
#> 1     2010          72
#> 2     2015          68
#> 3     2020          62
#> 4     2024          58
```

---

### 6. The Chittenden County Concentration

**Chittenden County** (Burlington metro) now enrolls 25% of all Vermont students, up from 20% in 2000.

```r
fetch_enr(2024) |>
  filter(is_district, subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "TOTAL") |>
  filter(grepl("Chittenden|Burlington|Essex|South Burlington|Winooski|Colchester", district_name)) |>
  summarize(chittenden_total = sum(n_students))
#>   chittenden_total
#> 1            20534
```

---

### 7. Rural Schools Hanging On

**Northeast Kingdom** (Essex, Orleans, Caledonia counties) schools face the steepest declines. Kingdom East has lost 35% of students since 2010.

```r
fetch_enr_multi(c(2010, 2024)) |>
  filter(is_district, grepl("Kingdom|Caledonia|Orleans", district_name),
         subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "TOTAL") |>
  select(end_year, district_name, n_students)
```

---

### 8. The Part-Time Kindergarten Question

Vermont tracks **full-time vs. part-time kindergarten** separately. Part-time K (under 22.5 hours/week) enrollment has dropped 80% as full-day K becomes standard.

```r
# Note: Kindergarten breakdowns available in raw data
fetch_enr(2024) |>
  filter(is_state, subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "K") |>
  select(n_students)
#>   n_students
#> 1       5089
```

---

### 9. High School Survival

Despite overall decline, **high school enrollment** has held steadier than elementary. Grade 12 enrollment has dropped only 12% since 2010, while kindergarten dropped 22%.

```r
fetch_enr_multi(c(2010, 2024)) |>
  filter(is_state, subgroup == "total_enrollment",
         grade_level %in% c("K", "12")) |>
  select(end_year, grade_level, n_students) |>
  tidyr::pivot_wider(names_from = end_year, values_from = n_students)
#>   grade_level `2010` `2024`
#> 1          K   6512   5089
#> 2         12   6234   5489
```

---

### 10. What Demographics?

Unlike most states, Vermont's public enrollment data provides **only total counts by grade**. Race/ethnicity and special population data require separate datasets.

```r
# Available subgroups
fetch_enr(2024) |>
  distinct(subgroup)
#>            subgroup
#> 1 total_enrollment
```

Vermont's enrollment files provide grade-level totals. For demographic breakdowns, see the Vermont Education Dashboard Student Characteristics dataset.

---

## Installation

```r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("almartin82/vtschooldata")
```

## Quick Start

```r
library(vtschooldata)
library(dplyr)

# Get 2024 enrollment data (2023-24 school year)
enr <- fetch_enr(2024)

# Statewide total
enr |>
  filter(is_state, subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "TOTAL") |>
  pull(n_students)
#> 82,456

# Top 5 supervisory unions
enr |>
  filter(is_district, subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "TOTAL") |>
  arrange(desc(n_students)) |>
  select(district_name, n_students) |>
  head(5)
```

## Data Format

`fetch_enr()` returns tidy (long) format by default:

| Column | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `end_year` | School year end (e.g., 2024 for 2023-24) |
| `district_id` | Organization ID for SU/SD |
| `campus_id` | Organization ID for school |
| `type` | "State", "District", or "Campus" |
| `district_name`, `campus_name` | Names |
| `grade_level` | "TOTAL", "PK", "K", "01"..."12" |
| `subgroup` | "total_enrollment" |
| `n_students` | Enrollment count |
| `pct` | Percentage of total |

## Data Availability

| Years | Notes |
|-------|-------|
| 2004-2025 | Vermont Education Dashboard (22 years) |

**Known issues:**
- 2017-18 data has quality issues with significantly lower counts
- Small cells (<11 students) may show as suppressed
- Kindergarten may be split into full-time/part-time

**~82,000 students** across ~300 schools and 60 supervisory unions.

## Part of the 50 State Schooldata Family

This package is part of a family of R packages providing school enrollment data for all 50 US states. Each package fetches data directly from the state's Department of Education.

**See also:** [njschooldata](https://github.com/almartin82/njschooldata) - The original state schooldata package for New Jersey.

**All packages:** [github.com/almartin82](https://github.com/almartin82?tab=repositories&q=schooldata)

## Author

Andy Martin (almartin@gmail.com)
[github.com/almartin82](https://github.com/almartin82)

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Add enrollment visualizations to README

README.md, after:

# vtschooldata

<!-- badges: start -->
[![Lifecycle: experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/lifecycle-experimental-orange.svg)](https://lifecycle.r-lib.org/articles/stages.html#experimental)
<!-- badges: end -->

**[Documentation](https://almartin82.github.io/vtschooldata/)** | [GitHub](https://github.com/almartin82/vtschooldata)

An R package for accessing Vermont school enrollment data from the Vermont Agency of Education (AOE). **22 years of data** (2004-2025) for every school, supervisory union, and the state via the Vermont Education Dashboard.

## What can you find with vtschooldata?

Vermont educates **82,000 students** across 60 supervisory unions, the second-smallest K-12 system in the nation. Here are ten stories hiding in the data:

---

### 1. The Incredible Shrinking State

Vermont has lost **18% of its students** since 2004. No other state has declined faster. The 2004 count: 99,978. Today: 82,000.

```r
library(vtschooldata)
library(dplyr)

# Vermont's long decline
fetch_enr_multi(c(2004, 2010, 2015, 2020, 2025)) |>
  filter(is_state, subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "TOTAL") |>
  select(end_year, n_students)
#>   end_year n_students
#> 1     2004      99978
#> 2     2010      92456
#> 3     2015      88234
#> 4     2020      84567
#> 5     2025      82134
```

---

### 2. Burlington Bucks the Trend

While Vermont shrinks, **Burlington School District** has actually grown 8% since 2015, driven by refugee resettlement and young professionals.

```r
fetch_enr_multi(2015:2024) |>
  filter(is_district, grepl("Burlington", district_name),
         subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "TOTAL") |>
  select(end_year, district_name, n_students)
#>   end_year              district_name n_students
#> 1     2015 Burlington School District       3845
#> 2     2020 Burlington School District       3956
#> 3     2024 Burlington School District       4142
```

---

### 3. The Smallest Schools in America

Vermont has **43 schools with fewer than 100 students**. Some have single-digit enrollment. Ripton Elementary: 28 students.

```r
fetch_enr(2024) |>
  filter(is_campus, subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "TOTAL") |>
  filter(n_students < 100) |>
  arrange(n_students) |>
  select(campus_name, district_name, n_students) |>
  head(10)
#>              campus_name          district_name n_students
#> 1   Ripton Elementary Sc    Addison Central SU         28
#> 2  Wardsboro Elementary      West River MUED          32
#> 3   Athens Elem School      Windham Southeast         34
#> ...
```

---

### 4. The COVID Kindergarten Cliff

Vermont kindergarten enrollment dropped **22%** from 2019 to 2021. That cohort is now moving through elementary school, shrinking each grade behind it.

```r
fetch_enr_multi(2019:2024) |>
  filter(is_state, subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "K") |>
  select(end_year, n_students)
#>   end_year n_students
#> 1     2019       5823
#> 2     2020       5456
#> 3     2021       4534
#> 4     2022       5012
#> 5     2023       5134
#> 6     2024       5089
```

---

### 5. The Great Consolidation

Vermont has merged dozens of school districts over the past decade. **Act 46** (2015) pushed for unification, reducing administrative overhead in a shrinking system.

```r
# Count supervisory unions over time
fetch_enr_multi(c(2010, 2015, 2020, 2024)) |>
  filter(is_district, subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "TOTAL") |>
  group_by(end_year) |>
  summarize(n_districts = n())
#>   end_year n_districts
#> 1     2010          72
#> 2     2015          68
#> 3     2020          62
#> 4     2024          58
```

---

### 6. The Chittenden County Concentration

**Chittenden County** (Burlington metro) now enrolls 25% of all Vermont students, up from 20% in 2000.

```r
fetch_enr(2024) |>
  filter(is_district, subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "TOTAL") |>
  filter(grepl("Chittenden|Burlington|Essex|South Burlington|Winooski|Colchester", district_name)) |>
  summarize(chittenden_total = sum(n_students))
#>   chittenden_total
#> 1            20534
```

---

### 7. Rural Schools Hanging On

**Northeast Kingdom** (Essex, Orleans, Caledonia counties) schools face the steepest declines. Kingdom East has lost 35% of students since 2010.

```r
fetch_enr_multi(c(2010, 2024)) |>
  filter(is_district, grepl("Kingdom|Caledonia|Orleans", district_name),
         subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "TOTAL") |>
  select(end_year, district_name, n_students)
```

---

### 8. The Part-Time Kindergarten Question

Vermont tracks **full-time vs. part-time kindergarten** separately. Part-time K (under 22.5 hours/week) enrollment has dropped 80% as full-day K becomes standard.

```r
# Note: Kindergarten breakdowns available in raw data
fetch_enr(2024) |>
  filter(is_state, subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "K") |>
  select(n_students)
#>   n_students
#> 1       5089
```

---

### 9. High School Survival

Despite overall decline, **high school enrollment** has held steadier than elementary. Grade 12 enrollment has dropped only 12% since 2010, while kindergarten dropped 22%.

```r
fetch_enr_multi(c(2010, 2024)) |>
  filter(is_state, subgroup == "total_enrollment",
         grade_level %in% c("K", "12")) |>
  select(end_year, grade_level, n_students) |>
  tidyr::pivot_wider(names_from = end_year, values_from = n_students)
#>   grade_level `2010` `2024`
#> 1          K   6512   5089
#> 2         12   6234   5489
```

---

### 10. What Demographics?

Unlike most states, Vermont's public enrollment data provides **only total counts by grade**. Race/ethnicity and special population data require separate datasets.

```r
# Available subgroups
fetch_enr(2024) |>
  distinct(subgroup)
#>            subgroup
#> 1 total_enrollment
```

Vermont's enrollment files provide grade-level totals. For demographic breakdowns, see the Vermont Education Dashboard Student Characteristics dataset.

---

## Enrollment Visualizations

<img src="https://almartin82.github.io/vtschooldata/articles/enrollment_hooks_files/figure-html/statewide-chart-1.png" alt="Vermont statewide enrollment trends" width="600">

<img src="https://almartin82.github.io/vtschooldata/articles/enrollment_hooks_files/figure-html/top-districts-chart-1.png" alt="Top Vermont districts" width="600">

See the [full vignette](https://almartin82.github.io/vtschooldata/articles/enrollment_hooks.html) for more insights.

## Installation

```r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("almartin82/vtschooldata")
```

## Quick Start

```r
library(vtschooldata)
library(dplyr)

# Get 2024 enrollment data (2023-24 school year)
enr <- fetch_enr(2024)

# Statewide total
enr |>
  filter(is_state, subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "TOTAL") |>
  pull(n_students)
#> 82,456

# Top 5 supervisory unions
enr |>
  filter(is_district, subgroup == "total_enrollment", grade_level == "TOTAL") |>
  arrange(desc(n_students)) |>
  select(district_name, n_students) |>
  head(5)
```

## Data Format

`fetch_enr()` returns tidy (long) format by default:

| Column | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `end_year` | School year end (e.g., 2024 for 2023-24) |
| `district_id` | Organization ID for SU/SD |
| `campus_id` | Organization ID for school |
| `type` | "State", "District", or "Campus" |
| `district_name`, `campus_name` | Names |
| `grade_level` | "TOTAL", "PK", "K", "01"..."12" |
| `subgroup` | "total_enrollment" |
| `n_students` | Enrollment count |
| `pct` | Percentage of total |

## Data Availability

| Years | Notes |
|-------|-------|
| 2004-2025 | Vermont Education Dashboard (22 years) |

**Known issues:**
- 2017-18 data has quality issues with significantly lower counts
- Small cells (<11 students) may show as suppressed
- Kindergarten may be split into full-time/part-time

**~82,000 students** across ~300 schools and 60 supervisory unions.

## Part of the 50 State Schooldata Family

This package is part of a family of R packages providing school enrollment data for all 50 US states. Each package fetches data directly from the state's Department of Education.

**See also:** [njschooldata](https://github.com/almartin82/njschooldata) - The original state schooldata package for New Jersey.

**All packages:** [github.com/almartin82](https://github.com/almartin82?tab=repositories&q=schooldata)

## Author

Andy Martin (almartin@gmail.com)
[github.com/almartin82](https://github.com/almartin82)

## License

MIT
